Lone U-Boat:

Introduction

Background
It is late 1942 and the seas are dangerous and frightening. Allied convoys surge across the Atlantic, bringing vital supplies to Britain and Russia. But beneath the waves, Germany’s U-Boats are on the hunt, silent and deadly.

You are the commander of a Type VIIC U-Boat, the backbone of the Kriegsmarine’s submarine fleet. Your mission is to intercept and destroy merchant shipping, evade aggressive escorts and survive the increasing threat of Allied air power.

Aircraft patrol the skies and escort ships roam the convoy lanes. Your deck gun may still sink a lone freighter, but surfacing risks retaliation. The decisions you make on when to hide and when to attack will be crucial to your success as a U-Boat captain.

This is a game of stealth, timing, and nerve. You’ll manage movement, depth, detection and damage across a range of different maps. Escorts will use sonar sweeps, depth charges and gunfire and, if you surface, the skies may bring additional dangers.

Can you complete your mission or will your U-Boat become yet another silent wreck beneath the Atlantic?

How the game works
This is a solitaire wargame. You play the game, and the enemy is controlled by the game. You will need at least 6, but preferably a few more, standard six-sided dice.

It is recommended that the counters provided on the final page of the game are used to play this game (especially for the U-Boat and Ships). Simply stick them to card and cut them out. A video demonstrating how generally to do this can be found on the Mike Lambo Games YouTube channel. I find that the easiest way to make these counters is to print or copy them onto an A4 printer label, leave the ink to dry completely, then peel the back and stick to 1–2mm card. I cut them out with good quality scissors. I now also spray them with a clear lacquer spray to give them some protection and a glossier feel, but that is certainly not necessary.

How to learn the game
If you have played any of my games before then you will have some idea about how my games work, although game systems tend to vary quite a lot from game to game. Even if you haven’t played any of my games before, I’m sure you will find the rules easy to read and very comprehensive, with useful examples of play. Whatever your experience of my games, I suggest you read the rules through once, and then watch my ‘Instructional Playthrough’ video on my Mike Lambo Games YouTube channel just to see how it should work. However you do it, I’m sure you’ll be out there in your U-Boat soon enough!

As you read the rules, please do not be frustrated or concerned if you hit a term or phrase that does not immediately make sense or that you feel needs more explanation — it is highly likely that the particular point will be covered again in more detail later in the rules or be highlighted in an example at some point.

The Missions
The game includes 10 Missions based in the North Atlantic around late 1942. Each Mission has its own Map and Objectives. Missions tend to get a little more challenging as you progress, allowing you to test your newly developed skills as a U-Boat Captain.
Note that a hex can only ever contain one Allied Ship at the same time. However, a Ship can occupy the same hex as the U-Boat and both a Ship and the U-Boat may (individually or together) occupy the same hex as any number of Aircraft.

Key Concepts and Set Up
Objectives

As stated above, each Mission will provide Objectives which must be completed in order to win the Mission. Always take careful note of what you have to do. You lose immediately if your U-Boat is destroyed. You do not lose just because all six of the key crew members referred to on each Mission Map are Killed in Action — there is, of course, a full crew on the U-Boat who can complete the Mission without those key crew members (although the job will be more difficult!). For clarity, you only need to do exactly what the objectives say in order to succeed in a particular Mission. There may be other distractions on the map, such other enemy Ships or Aircraft, but these only need to be destroyed if the objectives specifically say so. For example, here are the Objectives for Mission 1:

Objective: Destroy the Merchant Ship before it exits the map, then exit the map in the direction of the red arrow.

The Objectives here require you to destroy the Merchant Ship and then to exit the Mission Map at a particular point. There is no need to destroy any other enemy units, although of course it might help your cause if you do!

The Units

The only unit in the game that is controlled by you is the German U-Boat. It will encounter various Allied units which are controlled by the game system itself. These units consist of Merchant Ships, Corvettes and Destroyers (Ships) and B24 Liberators (Aircraft).

Facing, Line of Sight and Range

The Facing of any Unit in this game (U-Boat, Ship or Aircraft) is simply the direction the main hull or fuselage faces out of a hex, and this can therefore be any one of six directions. Units are always placed so that they are Facing the edge of a hex (rather than a corner). Facing is important when it comes to deciding Movement options, Turning direction, and also some aspects of battle.

Line of Sight runs in all directions and at all angles from a Unit’s hex with no distance limitation. Line of Sight is established by tracing an imaginary line from the centre of one unit’s hex to the centre of another unit’s hex and checking the hexes that the line passes through. Attacks by Ship gunfire or U-Boat deck gun fire and other mechanisms which use this Line of Sight method are each restricted to 3 hexes in Range and so it is not difficult to establish Line of Sight. Since only Land hexes block Line of Sight in this game, Line of Sight will often not be an issue, as many Mission Maps include significant areas of open water. For clarity, units never block Line of Sight.

Line of Sight is never an issue when considering units on the same hex or units which are adjacent to each other — units always have Line of Sight to another unit on the same hex as itself or on an adjacent hex.

When units trace Line of Sight to an enemy unit which is two hexes away, Line of Sight is just a little more complex but still follows the basic rule with the imaginary line referred to above being drawn (centre of hex to centre of hex). Before you reach for the ruler or laser, please be assured that these are not required! The two hexes in this situation will either be in a direct line of hexes with each other and Line of Sight will travel through just the one hex between them, or they will be separated by two hexes and Line of Sight will travel directly up the edge between those two hexes (in this latter case, always take the hex which is most favourable to the ‘observer’ unit). Here’s an example:
Let’s consider some of the ‘Range 2’ Lines of Sight of the U-Boat. It clearly has Line of Sight to the Destroyer as Line of Sight only passes through one intervening hex which is a Sea hex which does not block Line of Sight (black arrow). It also has Line of Sight to the Corvette (white arrow). Note how it passes along the edge of two other hexes on its way to the Corvette’s hex. One of those hexes is a Land hex which would usually block Line of Sight. However, because the other hex is a Sea hex, which does not (favourable to the observer) Line of Sight is established. Finally, the U-Boat does not have Line of Sight to the Merchant Ship (yellow arrow) because the one hex it passes through is a Land hex and that blocks Line of Sight.

Reminders: Although only selected Lines of Sight are shown in the diagram above, units can see in any direction. Remember also that Units do not themselves block Line of Sight, so that for example if there was a Ship positioned between the U-Boat and the Destroyer, they would still be able to see each other. Lines of Sight are always reciprocal — if a Unit A can see Unit B, then Unit B can see Unit A.

When units trace Line of Sight to an enemy unit which is three hexes away, there will always be two (and only two) intervening hexes and Line of Sight will always travel through both of those two hexes. The diagram below exemplifies this.

Let’s consider some of the ‘Range 3’ Lines of Sight of the U-Boat as shown in the above diagram. Note that they all pass through exactly 2 intervening hexes on their way from the U-Boat to the destination hex 3 hexes away. If either of those two intervening hexes is a Land hex then Line of Sight is blocked (yellow arrows). If not, then Line of Sight is established (black arrows). It is as simple as that — just make sure you identify the correct 2 hexes in each case!
Depth

Your U-Boat has the ability to Dive deeper into the Sea and to Ascend back up. In this game there are 4 possible Depths:

➤ Surfaced — The U-Boat is afloat on the Sea and therefore potentially very visible to enemies.
➤ Periscope Depth — The U-Boat is just below the surface with only the periscope visible (if at all).
➤ Medium Depth — The U-Boat is 50–100 yards or so under the surface.
➤ Deep — The U-Boat is 100–200 yards or so under the surface.

The gameplay effects of Depth will be covered as the Rules are explained below. However, as a general guide, your U-Boat is harder to detect at deeper levels, but it is easier to manoeuvre at shallower depths. Torpedoes can only be Fired and Loaded at shallower depths and Repairs are easier when Surfaced. The Deck Gun and Anti-Aircraft Flak Gun can only be Fired when Surfaced.

Detection Level

The Detection Level (DL) determines how much the enemy knows about the current position of the U-Boat. There are 4 Detection Levels: 0–3 (it can never go above Level 3):

➤ 0 — Silent
The enemy is not even sure that your U-Boat is in the vicinity.

➤ 1 — Aware
The enemy is aware of the presence of your U-Boat but not its location.

➤ 2 — Traced
The enemy knows more or less where your U-Boat is.

➤ 3 — Locked
The enemy knows exactly where your U-Boat is.

As with Depth, the gameplay effects of the Detection Level will be explained at relevant points in the Rules below. For now, note that as the Detection Level increases, the enemy units will start to hunt you down more and become more aggressive. The difference between DL1 and DL2 is particularly significant.

Set Up

Set up for each Mission is generally very quick:

➤ First, place Allied Ships on those hexes with relevant initial letters on them (M for Merchant Ship, C for Corvette and D for Destroyer). Place them Facing the edge of the hex where the initial letter is printed.

➤ Then place your U-Boat on the ‘U’ hex, Facing any direction of your choosing and at any depth.

➤ Place a counter or marker at zero on the Detection Level track in the top left hand corner of the Mission Map.

➤ Place a counter or marker in each of the 5 Torpedo Tubes to indicate that they are each loaded.

➤ No other counters or markers need to be placed at this stage. You have a full crew and no damage.

➤ Always check the specific instructions at the top of the page adjacent to each Mission Map to ensure nothing alters these basic instructions for any particular Mission.
Main Rules including the Turn Process

There is no turn limit in this game. The game proceeds through each turn as a series of 6 Phases (some of which are very quick or will not apply every turn). The bulk of the rules to the game can best be explained under each Phase, making them easier to find should they be needed. As ever with Mike Lambo Games, most of the key rules (or at least reminders of them) are set out in charts on the page next to each Mission Map for ease of reference.

Phase 1 — U-Boat Phase

This Phase is where you get to perform various actions with the U-Boat in order to achieve the Mission Objectives. It revolves around the Chart found on the page opposite each Mission Map and which looks like this:

(Chart reproduced conceptually as text)

U-Boat Phase — If Medium, DL −1 | If Deep, DL −2

Roll	Peri	Med	Deep	Action
—	—	—	—	Roll 3 dice ( 2 dice if Engine is Damaged ); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive
2	3	—	MOVE — Can only enter a Ship’s hex if Medium/Deep. Can only enter shallows if Surfaced/Periscope	
1	2	3	TURN — 1 hex edge left or right	
2	4	4	CHANGE DEPTH — 1 depth level (once per turn) (cannot go below Peri in shallows / above Med beneath ships)	
Eng	Eng	Eng	REPAIR — Remove 1 damage marker, or fix up to 2 Torp tubes (Hull cannot be repaired). Only Surface repairs if Engineer is KIA. Flak and Deck Gun Repairs can only be carried out if Surfaced	
—	—	—	FIRE DECK GUN — At Ships in LOS (R1-3) Roll 2d6: 7+ to Hit at R1-2 • 8+ to Hit at R3 On Hit, set DL to 3	
—	—	—	LOAD TORPS — Load 2 tubes; +1 if Weapons Officer is KIA	
—	—	—	FIRE TORPS — Fire 1-3 Torpedoes (R1-9). Roll d6 per Torp. If Fire 3, DL +1. Target first ship along line of fire. Missed Torps continue to other Ships beyond you	

Range Hit Table

Range	1-2	3-4	5-6	7-9
To Hit Side	3+	4+	5+	6+
To Hit Front/Rear	4+	5+	6+	6+

At the top of this Chart, the first line is a reminder to check your U-Boat’s Depth and to adjust the current Detection Level (DL) accordingly. These two concepts were introduced earlier. Here, you are checking the U-Boat’s Depth at the start of the U-Boat Phase before it has performed any Actions. If your U-Boat is currently at Medium Depth, then reduce the Detection Level by 1. If the U-Boat is currently Deep, then reduce the Detection Level by 2. These reductions cannot take the Detection Level below zero.

Then, roll 3 dice (but reduce this to 2 dice if your U-Boat’s engine is damaged — damage will be covered later). In either case, keep the one highest die rolled and discard the others. This die tells you how many Action Points (APs) you have this turn. Finally, if your Captain is still alive and has not been Killed in Action then you can add another 1AP to this total. Normally therefore, your APs will be 2-7. Once you lose your Captain, your APs will range from 1-6. Record your remaining APs as you spend them by using a d6.

You then get to ‘spend’ those Action Points on available Actions, one at a time, and you can perform those actions in any order. You can also perform Actions more than once in a turn, as long as you have the Action Points to spend (the exception is the ‘Change Depth’ Action which, as stated in the Chart, can only be performed once per turn). For clarity, you do not have to use all or any of your Action Points but any remaining APs are discarded and not saved or held over in any way.

There are seven actions which can be performed by the U-Boat. The Chart above sets out the actions and the Action Point Cost for each action (in the four columns on the left of the Chart). Note that the Action Point Cost varies for most Actions depending on the Depth of the U-Boat. In addition, some Actions are unavailable altogether at certain Depths (those marked with ‘--’). For example, MOVING your U-Boat costs more APs as you go deeper to reflect the fact that manoeuvring at depth was slower and more difficult. The same applies to TURNING. The attacking Actions such as FIRING (the Deck Gun), and LOADING and FIRING Torpedoes can only be done when Surfaced (in all cases) or at Periscope Depth (in the case of Loading and Firing…)
Torpedoes). Note that loading at Periscope Depth is expensive as it was significantly more difficult to do than when Surfaced. It is worth noting here that whilst REPAIRING certain aspects of the U-Boat was possible, not all damage could be repaired at Sea (what can and cannot be repaired will be covered later). The AP cost for this Action reflects the fact that repairs when Surfaced were far easier. As set out in the Chart, note that if you lose your Engineer, then only Surface repairs can be undertaken for the remainder of the Mission.

The U-Boat Actions

The actions available are as follows:

MOVE

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
1 | 2 | 3 | 3

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

MOVE — Can only enter a Ship’s hex if Medium/Deep. Can only enter shallows if Surfaced/Periscope

Each action allows your U-Boat to Move one hex in the direction it is currently Facing. The U-Boat cannot enter a hex which:

➤ Is a Land hex.
➤ Is a Shallow Sea hex unless the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth.
➤ Has a Ship in it unless the U-Boat is at a Depth level of Medium or Deep.

These are all pretty obvious and very memorable, although the last 2 bullets do have a reminder in the Chart.

TURN

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
1 | 1 | 2 | 3

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

TURN — 1 hex edge left or right

Each action allows your U-Boat to Turn one hex edge (60 degrees) to the left or right of where it is currently Facing. Facing is important as it determines where the U-Boat will Move to under that Action above, but also where it will Fire its Torpedoes under that Action below.

CHANGE DEPTH

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
2 | 1 | 2 | 1

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

CHANGE DEPTH — 1 depth level (once per turn) (cannot go below Peri in shallows / above Med beneath ships)

This action allows your U-Boat to Change Depth to an ‘adjacent’ Depth (up or down). Note that to Dive down to the next Deeper level always costs 2 APs, but to Ascend to the level above costs just 1 AP. Also, note that you can only change your Depth by one level at a time and only once per turn (you cannot therefore Dive or Ascend more than once, and you cannot Dive then Ascend or Ascend then Dive on the same turn).

Finally, there is a reminder that in Shallow Sea your U-Boat can only ever be at Periscope Depth or on the Surface, and when it is under a Ship (in the same hex as a Ship) it can only be at Medium or Deep. Your U-Boat simply cannot enter Shallow water unless it is already Surfaced or at Periscope Depth, and it cannot choose to enter an enemy Ship’s hex if it is not at Medium or Deep. If an enemy Ship enters the same hex as the U-Boat when the U-Boat is not at Medium or Deep, then the U-Boat will undertake a ‘Forced Dive’ which will be explained below when considering the movement of enemy Ships.

REPAIR

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
2 | 4 | 4 | 4

Eng | Eng | — | —

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

REPAIR — Remove 1 damage marker, or fix up to 2 Torp tubes (Hull cannot be repaired). Only Surface repairs if Engineer is KIA. Flak and Deck Gun Repairs can only be carried out if Surfaced.

Each action allows your U-Boat to be Repaired as set out in the Chart. It is more effective to do this on the Surface (cost = 2 APs) although it is possible to Repair certain aspects of the U-Boat at lower Depths if your Engineer is still alive to supervise the work, at a cost of 4 APs. You have a choice of what to Repair. The… (continued on next page)
aspects of your U-Boat that can be damaged are the Flak Gun, the Deck Gun, the Engine, the 5 Torpedo Tubes (individually) and the main Hull of the U-Boat.

The Hull cannot be Repaired at all, so we’ll not mention that again here.

The Flak Gun and Deck Gun can be Repaired but only when the U-Boat is Surfaced (irrespective of whether the Engineer is alive or not). Again, this is pretty obvious — those guns are positioned outside the U-Boat on top of the main body!

The Engine can be Repaired at any Depth if the Engineer is alive, then only on the Surface as usual.

Similarly, the 5 Torpedo Tubes can each be Repaired at any Depth, but only on the Surface once the Engineer is Killed in Action. Note also that the Chart says each action allows 2 Tubes to be Repaired. You choose which 2 to Repair. Once Repaired, they will always be empty and therefore need to be Loaded before use (because they are deemed to be emptied when initially damaged — explained later when looking at enemy ship attacks).

FIRE DECK GUN

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
— | — | — | —

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

FIRE DECK GUN — At Ships in LOS (R1–3) Roll 2d6: 7+ to Hit at R1–2 • 8+ to Hit at R3 — On Hit, set DL to 3

This action allows the U-Boat to Fire its Deck Gun at a cost of 2 APs. It cannot be Fired if it is damaged of course, and can only be Fired if the U-Boat is Surfaced (the Gun is outside and on top of the main body of the U-Boat). You should select a target enemy Ship and then ensure that the target is within 3 hexes of the U-Boat (not in the same hex as it) and that the U-Boat has Line of Sight to the target (as explained earlier in the Rules). Remember, only Land hexes block Line of Sight. The Facing of the U-Boat and the target is irrelevant here. If Range and Line of Sight are valid, then roll 2d6 to take the shot. At Range 1–2 hexes, a total 7+ is required to Hit. At Range 3 hexes, it’s 8+. If successful, then the Detection Level is immediately set to 3. This (and the fact the U-Boat needs to be Surfaced) makes it a risky option, which is best saved for finishing off Ships when perhaps Torpedoes may not be an option. For each Gun Hit, you get to roll 1d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart which looks like this:

Allied Ship Damage Chart

For each Torpedo / Deck Gun Hit on a Ship, roll d6 for Damage:

Target Type	Roll 1	Roll 2–3	Roll 4–5	Roll 6
Merchant	No significant damage	Damaged → Sunk	Catastrophic Hit → Sunk	—
Corvette	1–2 No significant damage	3–4 Damaged → Sunk	5–6 Catastrophic Hit → Sunk	—
Destroyer	1–3 No significant damage	4–5 Damaged → Sunk	6 Catastrophic Hit → Sunk	—

The Chart is pretty self-explanatory.

• No significant damage results have no effect.

• The Damaged → Sunk result means the target Ship is Damaged if it is not already — mark it as Damaged in some way. If it is already Damaged then it will be Sunk and removed from the Map.

• The Catastrophic Hit → Sunk result means the target Ship being Sunk immediately.

LOAD TORPEDOES

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
1 | 4 | — | —

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

LOAD TORPS — Load 2 tubes; +1 if Weapons Officer is KIA

This action allows your U-Boat to Load up its Torpedo Tubes, but only if it is Surfaced (1 AP) or at Periscope Depth (4 APs). Note that you can Load any 2 Torpedo Tubes of your choice out of the 5 available.
cannot, however, Load Damaged Tubes. Note also that if your Weapons Officer is Killed in Action, you can only Load 1 Tube per action.

FIRE TORPEDOES

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
2 | 2 | — | —

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

FIRE TORPS — Fire 1-3 Torpedoes (R1-9). Roll d6 per Torp
If Fire 3, DL +1
Target first ship along line of fire. Missed Torps continue to other Ships beyond

Range Hit Table

Range	1-2	3-4	5-6	7-9
To Hit Side	3+	4+	5+	6+
To Hit Front/Rear	4+	5+	6+	6+

Each action allows the U-Boat to Fire 1, 2 or 3 Torpedoes. There is no Range limit for a Torpedo attack, although the further away the target is, the harder it is to Hit. You get to choose whether to Fire 1, 2 or 3 Torpedoes on a single Fire Torpedoes Action. Each action allows Torpedoes to be Fired from either the front 4 Tubes or the 1 rear Tube (not both). If Fired from the Rear, then only 1 can be Fired of course.

Torpedoes Fired from the Front Tubes will only travel along the one line of hexes along which the U-Boat is currently Facing. The Rear Torpedo will similarly only be Fired along the line of hexes running in the exact opposite direction to the way the U-Boat is currently Facing. Firing 3 Torpedoes at once is noisy and attracts attention by raising the Detection Level by 1. If any Torpedoes hit the target (no matter how many) then the Detection Level is raised by 1 (only). This is in addition to the +1 for Firing 3 Torpedoes if relevant.

Example: the U-Boat Fires 3 Torpedoes and all 3 Hit. The DL will be raised by 2 in total.
Example 2: the U-Boat Fires 2 Torpedoes and both Hit. The DL will be raised by 1 in total.
Example 3: the U-Boat Fires 2 Torpedoes and neither Hit. The DL is unchanged.

You should check that Line of Sight is present. This will be very easy as you will just be scanning along a line of hexes (front or rear) to check that no Land hexes block Line of Sight. Also, count the Range of the attack in hexes, ignoring the U-Boat’s own hex but including the target’s hex.

You then need to check whether the target Ship is being targeted on its side (black arrows in the diagram opposite) or whether it is being targeted on its front or rear (white arrows) because, together with the Range of the attack, this affects the number required to Hit, as can be seen in the Chart above (this is easy to determine because Torpedo attacks always come in along a line of hexes). Roll a d6 for each Torpedo Fired, and each die which displays the required To Hit value or higher is a successful Hit. For each Hit, you roll a d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart we looked at above for the Deck Gun attacks. For each miss, just check that there are no other Ships along that line of hexes which those Torpedoes might Hit. If so, roll to Hit again using the appropriate Range and Facing of the Target. Hitting another Ship does not change the rule about increasing the DL — it will still only be raised by 1 for any number of Hits (no matter how many and on what Ship(s)).

Selecting the number of Torpedoes to Fire is an important decision, and will be impacted by the following:

➤ You only have 5 Torpedo Tubes (4 to the front and 1 to the rear).
➤ You can only Fire Torpedoes if the relevant Tube is Loaded.
➤ Loading more Torpedoes can be challenging/risky.
➤ Firing 3 Torpedoes is noisy and attracts attention by raising the Detection Level by 1.
➤ If any Hit the target (no matter how many were Fired or how many Hit) the Detection Level is raised by 1.
➤ Each Hit allows one roll on the Allied Ships Damage Chart we looked at above for the Deck Gun.
➤ Torpedoes which miss the target Ship continue along the line of hexes and will try to Hit any Ships further along that line of hexes.
➤ The die roll required to Hit varies with the Range of the attack and the Facing of the target Ship.
Example of a U-Boat Phase

I roll 3d6 and roll 2, 4, 5. I take the highest (5) and add 1 because my Captain has not been Killed in Action, giving me 6 Action Points. I decide that now is a good time to attack, so I Move my U-Boat one hex forward, which costs me 1 AP because my U-Boat is Surfaced. I then Turn my U-Boat to the left so that my front Torpedo Tubes are Facing the direction I want to attack — this costs another 1 AP, leaving me with 4 AP.

I then Fire Torpedoes at a cost of 2 AP, leaving me with 2 AP left to spend. I decide to launch 3 Torpedoes because I have two enemy Ships in my line of fire (which, for Torpedoes, only runs along the line of hexes to my front (or rear). I move the Detection Track up 1 level as a result of the launch (because I’m launching 3). The Torpedoes will get to the Corvette first. Checking the Chart, I see that at a Range of 2 hexes I need 4+ to Hit the Front (or Rear) of the Corvette. You can see clearly on the Mission Map above that the Facing of the Corvette is directly towards my U-Boat, and therefore I am hitting its front. I roll 3d6 (one for each Torpedo) and roll 1, 3, 6. That’s 2 misses and 1 Hit. For the Hit, I roll 1d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart and roll a 3, leaving the Corvette Damaged. The Hit causes the Detection Level to increase by another 1 level.

The 2 missed Torpedoes continue along the row of hexes and reach the Merchant Ship. The Range is now 4 hexes and the Torpedoes are coming up against the side of the Ship. The Chart tells me that again I need to roll 4+ to Hit. I roll 2d6 and roll 4, 5. Both Hit and so I roll 2d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart, rolling 5, 5. A single 5 was enough to Sink the Merchant Ship, which is removed from the Map. Note that the Detection Level is not increased for these Hits, as it has already been increased for the earlier Hit on the Corvette. The Detection Level can only ever be increased by a maximum of 2 levels for any one attack: 1 for launching 3 Torpedoes, and 1 if any of them Hit. If 1 or 2 Torpedoes are launched then that attack can only raise the Level by 1 maximum (if any Hit).

Because the Corvette is still alive, albeit Damaged, I decide to use my final 2 APs to Change Depth by Diving to Periscope Depth (although maybe I would be better off attacking again with Torpedoes (if I have any loaded) or my Deck Gun (if it is not damaged)).
Phase 2 — Merchant Ships Phase

This relatively quick Phase is where any Merchant Ships on the Map get to Move. It is summarised like this on the page adjacent to each Mission Map:

Merchant Ships Phase:
If Undamaged MOVE 1 Hex
If Damaged, roll d6: on 4+ MOVE 1 Hex
Always Face dotted line

As you can see, Merchant Ships Move one hex if they are undamaged. They Move along the dotted line which emanates from their starting hex and should always be placed Facing the next hex to which they will Move as indicated by the dotted line. If a Ship is Damaged, then roll a d6 and only Move it if the die roll is 4, 5 or 6. If a Ship Moves off the Map (at the yellow arrow) then remove it from the Map. If this happens you lose the game if the Objectives required you to destroy it.

As can be seen in this diagram, the Merchant Ship Moves one hex along its track (dotted line). When it enters the new hex, it immediately Turns to Face down the map because that is where the dotted line takes it next.

Reminder: Merchant Ships will not Move if the hex they are Moving to already has a Ship in it. They can Move into the same hex as the U-Boat, which will be forced to Dive if it is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth — this will be explained below when looking at Corvette and Destroyer actions.

Phase 3 — Detection Phase

In this Phase enemy Corvettes and Destroyers (not Merchant Ships) will use their search equipment (including sonar) to try to find you. This Chart summarises the key points here:

Detection Phase:
Roll a d6 for each Escort which has the U-Boat in LOS and within 3 hexes.
Each success = +1 DL

Base Detection Roll needed (if U-Boat is):
Surfaced: 1+
Periscope: 2+
Medium: 4+
Deep: 5+

Modify as follows:
Engine Damage: Decrease roll required by 1
Sonar Operator is alive: Increase roll required by 1

As stated in the Chart, the effective Range of their equipment is 3 hexes and they do need Line of Sight (in any direction — explained earlier). For each Ship that can detect, roll 1d6 and consult the Chart for the roll needed to succeed. As you can see, the base number required depends on the current depth level of the U-Boat:

Surfaced: 1+ | Periscope: 2+ | Medium: 4+ | Deep: 5+

There are just 2 modifiers to apply. If your Sonar Operator is still alive, the target roll is increased (for example, the roll for Medium Depth would become 5+). If the U-Boat’s Engine is damaged (making it noisy) then the target number is reduced by 1 (for example, the roll for Periscope Depth would become 1+, which is an automatic success of course).

For each die which rolls the target number or higher, the Detection Level is increased by 1.

Note: You can skip this Phase if the Detection Level is already at 3, as it cannot go any higher.
Example of a Detection Phase

The 2 Corvettes both have my U-Boat in Line of Sight and within a Range of 3 hexes (one is Range 3 and the other is Range 2). Whilst the Destroyer has my U-Boat within Range, it has no Line of Sight. Merchant Ships never take part in the Detection Phase.

I roll 2d6 (1 for each Corvette). My U-Boat is at Periscope Depth so only a base 2+ is required. However, my Sonar Operator is alive and so this is increased to 3+. My Engine is not Damaged. The roll results in 2, 3, which is 1 success and 1 failure, so the Detection Level is increased by 1.

Phase 4 — Escort’s Phase

In this Phase, any Corvettes and Destroyers on the Map are activated. They will try to prevent you from achieving your objectives by protecting the Merchant Ships or other Objectives and by attacking your U-Boat whenever the chance arises.

The relevant Chart is as follows:

Escorts Phase

Activate closest first (you choose for ties); Resolve dice in order

For Destroyer: Dice = 3 + DL ( 3 if damaged )
For Corvette: Dice = 2 + DL ( 2 if damaged )

Roll	Action
1	If DL = 1–3: FIRE or DEPTH CHARGE
2	MOVE — If Blocked, TURN — If DL = 1–3: DEPTH CHARGE
3	MOVE — If DL = 1–3: DEPTH CHARGE
4	MOVE — If Blocked, TURN — If DL = 1–3: DEPTH CHARGE
5	MOVE — If DL = 1–3: DEPTH CHARGE
6	MOVE — TURN — If DL = 1–3: DEPTH CHARGE
Depth Charge Rule

If U-Boat is not Surfaced and is at Range 0–1, roll 1d6 on U-Boat Damage Chart
(Destroyer: 2d6, take lowest)

TURN Rule

If DL = 0–1, turn 1 hex edge towards Anchor.
If DL = 2–3 turn 1 hex edge towards U-Boat/Anchor, only turn if blocked (turn randomly).
If Facing away, turn randomly.
If on same hex as U-Boat/Anchor, only turn if Blocked (turn randomly).

FIRE Rule

If U-Boat is Surfaced, in LOS and at Range 1–3, set DL to 3 and roll as a Critical Hit on U-Boat Damage Chart below.

The Escorts activate in order, starting with the Ship which is closest to the U-Boat. For ties, you get to decide which activates first.

On each Escort’s activation in turn, complete the following steps:
1. Determine the number of dice that will be rolled for the Escort. As you can see from the Chart, Destroyers roll a basic 3 dice and Corvettes roll a basic 2 dice. In both cases, if the Ship in question is not Damaged, add a number of dice equal to the current Detection Level.

2. Roll the dice and arrange them in order from lowest to highest. Then resolve each and every die (including duplicates) in turn, lowest to highest, performing the actions set out in the chart for that numbered die. Always try to perform every Action for each die even if an earlier Action is not possible.

For example, if an Escort rolls 1, 3, 5, 5 then it will first use the 1. If the Detection Level is greater than 0 then it will try to FIRE at the U-Boat or deploy DEPTH CHARGES (as we’ll see below, it can only do one of these things depending on the Depth of the U-Boat).

Using the 3 it will MOVE and then (whether it moved or not) it will TURN, and whatever the outcome of this, if the Detection Level is greater than 0 it will then seek to deploy DEPTH CHARGES.

With the 5 if the Detection Level is greater than 0 it will seek to FIRE at the U-Boat using its main guns.

It will then do the same again with the other 5.

Escort Actions

The actions available to the Escorts are as follows:

MOVE

For each Move Action, the Escort will Move one hex forward to the one adjacent hex it is currently Facing, if possible. It cannot enter a hex which:

➤ Is a Land hex.
➤ Already has a Ship in it.

If it cannot Move into that hex (including where the destination hex would be ‘off map’) then it will not Move.

Forcing the U-Boat to Dive

If the Escort Moves into the same hex as the U-Boat, then it is necessary to consider the U-Boat’s current Depth.

➤ If the U-Boat is at Medium Depth or Deep then there is no additional effect.
➤ If the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth then it will make a Forced Dive.

Immediately set the U-Boat’s Depth to Medium and increase the Detection Level by 1. In addition, at the start of the next turn, the U-Boat suffers a –2 AP penalty when establishing the available APs for that turn. Of course, it could be the case that the U-Boat is in Shallow Sea, in which case it cannot go deeper than Periscope Level. If a ‘Forced Dive’ situation arises in that case, then the U-Boat is deemed to be Destroyed and the game ends in defeat. The box at the bottom of the page adjacent to each Mission Map has reminders of all this:

Ship Movement and Forced Dive:
Ships cannot enter a hex with another Ship.
‘Blocked’ = Land, off-Map or another Ship.
If a Ship enters a hex with Surfaced or Periscope Depth U-Boat, it is Forced to Dive to Medium: DL +1 now, and –2 AP next turn.
Hull Damage: U-Boat immediately ascends to permitted depth. If it cannot Dive/Ascend as required here, it is Destroyed.

Note also the point about Hull Damage here (in italics). Hull Damage is covered later when we look at Escorts attacking the U-Boat, but note that the U-Boat’s ability to stay at certain Depths is affected by the Damage it takes to its Hull. The Hull Damage Track on the Mission Maps has reminder of this. As you can see, the first Hull Damage taken means it cannot go Deep. The second means it cannot go to Medium Depth and the third means it cannot submerge at all (must stay Surfaced). If it ever suffers Hull Damage and is then left deeper than permitted, it must ascend immediately to the deepest permitted Depth (no Detection Level effect or AP penalty for ascending). If a Ship in the same hex prevents this, then the U-Boat will be Destroyed.
TURN
TURN: If DL=0-1, turn hex edge towards Anchor.  If DL=2-3, turn 1 hex edge towards U-Boat.  If Facing U-Boat/Anchor, only turn if blocked (turn randomly).  If Facing away, turn randomly.  If on same hex as U-Boat/Anchor, only turn if Blocked (turn randomly).

For each Turn Action, the Escort will Turn one hex edge (60 degrees) either to its left or to its right.

When it comes to the direction it will Turn (left or right) this depends on the position of the U-Boat in relation to either the Anchor hex printed on the Mission Map or the U-Boat, which in turn depends on the current Detection Level.

We’ll work through the reminder box above which is found on the page adjacent to each Mission Map.

If the DL is 0 or 1, then the Escort will Turn towards the Anchor hex. If the DL is 2 or 3, then the Escorts have a better idea of your position and will instead Turn towards the U-Boat. ‘Towards’ always means Turn in the direction which currently has the smallest angle to the Anchor hex or U-Boat.

As noted in the box, if the Escort is Facing the Anchor or U-Boat (which means it happens to be on the exact same line of hexes as the Anchor or U-Boat and Facing directly at it), then it will only Turn if it is Blocked. ‘Blocked’ means that the hex it is Facing is not currently one it can Move into because there is a Ship on it or it is a Land hex or ‘off map’. If that is the case, then the direction of Turning is selected completely at random. This is because whichever way it Turns in that case, the angle to the Anchor hex or U-Boat will be the same (zero degrees of course — it is Facing right at it).

Similarly, if the Escort happens to be on the exact same line of hexes as the Anchor or U-Boat and Facing directly away from it, it will Turn randomly, this time regardless of whether it is Facing a Blocked hex or not.

Finally, if the Escort happens to be in the same hex as the U-Boat (directly above it) then it will Turn randomly, but only if Blocked (the hex it is Facing has a Ship in it, or is a Land hex or ‘off map’).

Examples of Turning

All cases assume that DL = 2 or 3 (but the examples would work the same if DL = 0–1 and the U-Boat was actually the Anchor hex).

• The undamaged Corvette would Turn one hex edge to its left as that is towards the U-Boat. It does not matter that it Turns past the actual direction of the U-Boat. It would still do this even if it resulted in the Corvette now Facing a Blocked hex (which it doesn’t here).

• The undamaged Destroyer will not Turn because it is Facing directly at the U-Boat and the hex it is Facing is not Blocked.

• The damaged Corvette will Turn randomly because it is Facing directly at the U-Boat and the hex it is Facing is Blocked. Again, it will Turn in the randomly chosen direction even if that meant it was then Facing a Blocked hex.

• The damaged Destroyer will Turn randomly because it is Facing directly away from the U-Boat (regardless of whether the hex it is Facing is Blocked or not).

Reminder: It never matters if the hex that the Escort Turns to Face is itself Blocked (Ship, Land or ‘off map’).
Remember that the Turn action does not appear in the Escort Action Chart alone — it always comes after a Move action. The two combinations of this are as follows:

MOVE → TURN (rolls 3, 6)

Perform the Move action if possible and then, whether it Moved or not, and regardless of the facing hex, perform the Turn action.

MOVE → (if blocked) TURN (rolls 2, 4)

Perform the Move action if possible and then, whether it Moved or not, and if now Facing a Blocked hex, perform the Turn action.

Note here that the Turn action is only performed if the Escort is now Facing another Ship, a Land hex, or ‘off map’.

In fact, the above always come before a Depth Charge Action (see below). Again, the Depth Charge element will be attempted whether the Move and Turn Actions happened or not.

One of the key things to remember when operating the Escorts is that you will never need to decide what is best for the Escort to do. Just follow the instructions precisely, even if you think the particular action is unrealistic or just plain daft. Believe me, the Escorts will find you very quickly once they know where you are. If you are thinking, you are doing it wrong!

DEPTH CHARGE

DEPTH CHARGE:
If U-Boat is not Surfaced and is at Range 0–1, roll 1d6 on U-Boat Damage Chart (Destroyer: 2d6, take lowest)

For each Depth Charge Action, the Escort will seek to deploy Depth Charges into the sea, which sink and explode in the hope of damaging or destroying the U-Boat. As stated in the box above, this can only happen when the U-Boat is not Surfaced (so it must be at Periscope, Medium or Deep Depth level) and when the U-Boat is at Range 0–1 hex (meaning the U-Boat must be in the same hex (below the Escort) or in an adjacent hex).

If so, the Depth Charge attack is deemed to be successful to at least some extent and you must roll 1d6 on the U-Boat Damage Chart if the Escort is a Corvette, or 2d6, taking the lowest result of the 2 dice, if it is a Destroyer. As with all the other Charts and ‘boxes’, the U-Boat Damage Chart is found on the page adjacent to each Mission Map and looks like this:

U-Boat Damage Chart

(Depth Charge, Ship Gun Fire and B24 Aircraft attacks)

d6	Result
1	Critical Hit! — Roll d6: 1 U-Boat Destroyed • 2 + 2 Hull Damage • 3–4 Torp tubes 3–4 • 5–6 Damage x 2 (roll twice at 3–4 below)
2	Hull Damage: +1 Hull Damage
3–4	Damage: Roll 1d6 → 1 + 1 Hull Damage • 2 Flak gun • 3 Torp tubes • 4–5 Engine • 6 Deck gun (no effect if already damaged)
5–6	Crew KIA: Roll d6 for Crew member (no effect if already KIA). If Medic is alive, roll d6 to avoid KIA on 5+ (but not on self)

You can see that by taking the lowest of the 2 dice rolled when a Destroyer attacks, it is more likely to roll Critical Hits and Hull Damage. Each type of Damage will be explained in full below, after the FIRE Action.

FIRE

FIRE:
If U-Boat is Surfaced, in LOS and at Range 1–3, Set DL to 3 and roll as a Critical Hit on U-Boat Damage Chart below

For each Fire Action, the Escort will seek to Fire its main guns in the hope of damaging or destroying the U-Boat. Note that this tends to be a more devastating attack than a Depth Charge attack so be careful to avoid it wherever possible.

As shown in the box above, this can only happen if the U-Boat is Surfaced, in Line of Sight (using the standard rules explained at the start of the Rules) and within Range 1–3 hexes. If so, then the Escort is deemed to have spotted the U-Boat and the Detection Level is therefore immediately set to 3. The shot is deemed to be successful and to cause a Critical Hit, so that you are deemed to have rolled a 1 on the U-Boat Damage Chart. Each type of Damage will now be explained in full:
d6 U-Boat Damage Chart (Depth Charge, Ship Gun Fire, and B24 Aircraft attacks)

1 — Critical Hit

The U-Boat suffers a major Hit. Roll a d6 to establish exactly what has been damaged:

1 — The U-Boat suffers catastrophic damage and is Destroyed.

2 — Hull Damage is increased by 2. If it reaches 4 the U-Boat floods and is Destroyed. It cannot be repaired.

3–4 — Up to 3 Torpedo Tubes are damaged. Roll 3d6 and the Tubes with the matching numbers 1-5 are damaged. 6s, duplicates and dice that match Tubes which are already damaged are ignored (lucky escape). Mark damaged Tubes as such. They need to be repaired before they can be used again. (If a loaded Tube is damaged, then it becomes unloaded.)

5–6 — Double damage occurs — roll twice on the 3–4 option below.

2 — Hull Damage

Hull Damage is increased by 1. If it reaches 4 the U-Boat floods and is Destroyed. It cannot be repaired.

3–4 — Damage (general damage)

Roll a d6 to establish exactly what has been damaged:

1 — Hull Damage is increased by 1. If it reaches 4 the U-Boat floods and is Destroyed. It cannot be repaired.

2 — The Flak Gun is damaged and cannot be used until repaired, which can only happen when the U-Boat is Surfaced.

3 — Up to 2 Torpedo Tubes are damaged. Roll 2d6 and the Tubes with the matching numbers 1-5 are damaged. 6s, duplicates and dice that match Tubes which are already damaged are ignored (lucky escape). Mark damaged Tubes as such. They need to be repaired before they can be used again. (If a loaded Tube is damaged, then it becomes unloaded.)

4–5 — The Engine is damaged — this results in one less die being rolled when establishing available APs (to reflect the fact the U-Boat is harder to manoeuvre) and also makes enemy Detection easier (the damaged engine is noisy). It can be repaired in the usual way.

6 — The Deck Gun is damaged and cannot be used until repaired, which can only happen when the U-Boat is Surfaced.

5–6 — Crew Killed in Action

Roll a d6 to decide which crew member is killed. They are numbered on the Mission Maps (1–6).

If the number matches a crew member who has already been Killed in Action then you have a lucky escape.

If it matches any crew member except the Medical Officer and the Medical Officer is still alive, then he gets a chance to save the Crew member by rolling 5+ on a d6.

Success leaves things as they are.

Failure results in the crew member’s death.

The Medical Officer cannot save himself. Therefore, if the Medical Officer is targeted or the Medical Officer is already dead, then the targeted crew member will automatically be Killed in Action.

Reminder

When suffering Hull Damage, the U-Boat must ascend to a shallower Depth if necessary.

Hull Damage: U-Boat immediately ascends to permitted depth.

Note that for all damage and crew Killed in Action, there are boxes on the Mission Maps in which to place markers to record these things.
Phase 5 — Allied B24 Phase

Allied B24 Aircraft are placed as part of the End of Turn Events Phase (Phase 6) below.

In this Phase, any B24 Aircraft already on the Map will activate (in any order you choose). As you can see from the box above, the first thing that a B24 will do when activated is to Move two hexes in the direction it is currently Facing. B24s can enter any hex type, including Land hexes and hexes already occupied by a Ship and/or the U-Boat. If its Moves take it off the Mission Map then remove it, ready to be placed again if the relevant Event is rolled in Phase 6 below.

Once it has Moved, then it may Turn. It will only do this if the Detection Level is 2 or 3, in which case it will always Turn towards the U-Boat in the same way that Escorts do (as explained earlier). However, note that if the Detection Level is 0 or 1, the B24 simply will not Turn at all (the Anchor is irrelevant to B24s). The other instructions are slightly different too. If it is directly Facing the U-Boat (on the same line of hexes) then it will never Turn (why would it, as nothing Blocks it?). If Facing directly away, it will Turn randomly. If it is in the same hex as the U-Boat it will only Turn if the hex it is Facing is ‘off Map’, in which case it will again Turn randomly. Remember, it will only ever Turn if the Detection Level is 2 or 3, not if it is 0 or 1. At 0 or 1 it will fly straight until it leaves the Mission Map.

Once it has Moved 2 hexes and then Turned (or not), it will seek to Attack the U-Boat with bombs and machine guns. However, it can only do this if the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth and only at Range 0–1 in any direction (it must therefore be adjacent to or in the same hex as the U-Boat).

Before it does Attack, the U-Boat gets a chance to use its Flak Gun to shoot it down (or scare it away). However, as stated above, it can only do this if it is Surfaced (obviously) and the Flak Gun is undamaged. If so, roll 2d6 and on 8+ (7+ if the U-Boat’s Lookout is alive) then the B24 is destroyed (or scared off).

If the B24 survives that attempt, or the U-Boat could not use the Flak Gun for any reason, then roll 1d6 on the Damage Chart that is included within the B24 box itself. The outcomes are self-explanatory.

Phase 6 — End of Turn Events Phase

This Phase is where varied, random and unexpected events can occur which mostly add to the challenge of the various Missions but can be helpful on occasion. The relevant chart will, as usual, appear on the page opposite each Mission Map. As it changes from Mission to Mission, it is not reproduced here, but examples will be given below as each Event is explained.

In this Phase, two dice are rolled and added together. The relevant numbered Event is then performed if possible. If impossible or irrelevant, then no Event occurs; the dice are not rerolled. Each possible Event will now be explained in full:
Place a B24 Liberator Aircraft

If DL = 2–3 place B24 Facing U-Boat, on edge hex of Map which is furthest from and on same hex-line as U-Boat (max 2)

This only applies if the Detection Level is 2 or 3. If so, then a new B24 aircraft is placed on the Mission Map. However, note that (as stated in the Event itself) a maximum of 2 aircraft can be present on the Mission Map at any one time. If there are already 2 on the Map, then ignore this Event.

To work out where to place the B24, trace the 6 lines of hexes that run out of the U-Boat’s current hex until you reach the edge of the Map. Of the six lines, take the longest (decide randomly if there is a tie). Then place the B24 on the hex at the edge of the Map at the end of the longest line. Always place it Facing the U-Boat. It will first Activate in Phase 5 of the next turn.

In this example, the longest of the six lines of hexes emanating from the U-Boat’s own hex is the line running straight up the Map. The B24 is therefore placed at the edge of the Map on this line of hexes Facing directly at the U-Boat.

Escort Detection

Escort Detection: If DL is not already at 3, perform Phase 3 (only) now

Simply repeat Phase 3 (the Detection Phase) again now. There is no point in (ever) performing this Phase when the Detection Level is already at 3, as that is the highest it can go.

U-Boat Radio Interception by Allies

If U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope depth, Radio intercepted by Allies: If DL = 0 then set DL to 1

Note that this Event only applies when the Detection Level is currently 0. If so, and the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth, then the DL Level is raised to 1. The Event has no other effect.

U-Boat Runs Silently

If U-Boat not Surfaced and Engine is not damaged, U-Boat runs silently for a while: −1 DL

If the U-Boat is at any other depth than ‘Surfaced’ and its Engine is not damaged (in which case it would be noisy) then you can reduce the Detection Level by 1.

Damage from High Pressure

Hull Pressure: If Deep, Hull groans under the pressure: +1 Hull Damage (U-Boat must ascend to Medium Depth)

If the U-Boat is Deep then it suffers 1 Hull Damage. Of course, this will immediately result in it having to ascend to Medium Depth.

Once the End of Turn Events Phase has been completed, return to Phase 1 and start the next turn.
