Lone U-Boat:

Introduction

Background
It is late 1942 and the seas are dangerous and frightening. Allied convoys surge across the Atlantic, bringing vital supplies to Britain and Russia. But beneath the waves, Germany’s U-Boats are on the hunt, silent and deadly.

You are the commander of a Type VIIC U-Boat, the backbone of the Kriegsmarine’s submarine fleet. Your mission is to intercept and destroy merchant shipping, evade aggressive escorts and survive the increasing threat of Allied air power.

Aircraft patrol the skies and escort ships roam the convoy lanes. Your deck gun may still sink a lone freighter, but surfacing risks retaliation. The decisions you make on when to hide and when to attack will be crucial to your success as a U-Boat captain.

This is a game of stealth, timing, and nerve. You’ll manage movement, depth, detection and damage across a range of different maps. Escorts will use sonar sweeps, depth charges and gunfire and, if you surface, the skies may bring additional dangers.

Can you complete your mission or will your U-Boat become yet another silent wreck beneath the Atlantic?

How the game works
This is a solitaire wargame. You play the game, and the enemy is controlled by the game. You will need at least 6, but preferably a few more, standard six-sided dice.

It is recommended that the counters provided on the final page of the game are used to play this game (especially for the U-Boat and Ships). Simply stick them to card and cut them out. A video demonstrating how generally to do this can be found on the Mike Lambo Games YouTube channel. I find that the easiest way to make these counters is to print or copy them onto an A4 printer label, leave the ink to dry completely, then peel the back and stick to 1–2mm card. I cut them out with good quality scissors. I now also spray them with a clear lacquer spray to give them some protection and a glossier feel, but that is certainly not necessary.

How to learn the game
If you have played any of my games before then you will have some idea about how my games work, although game systems tend to vary quite a lot from game to game. Even if you haven’t played any of my games before, I’m sure you will find the rules easy to read and very comprehensive, with useful examples of play. Whatever your experience of my games, I suggest you read the rules through once, and then watch my ‘Instructional Playthrough’ video on my Mike Lambo Games YouTube channel just to see how it should work. However you do it, I’m sure you’ll be out there in your U-Boat soon enough!

As you read the rules, please do not be frustrated or concerned if you hit a term or phrase that does not immediately make sense or that you feel needs more explanation — it is highly likely that the particular point will be covered again in more detail later in the rules or be highlighted in an example at some point.

The Missions
The game includes 10 Missions based in the North Atlantic around late 1942. Each Mission has its own Map and Objectives. Missions tend to get a little more challenging as you progress, allowing you to test your newly developed skills as a U-Boat Captain.