Note that a hex can only ever contain one Allied Ship at the same time. However, a Ship can occupy the same hex as the U-Boat and both a Ship and the U-Boat may (individually or together) occupy the same hex as any number of Aircraft.

Key Concepts and Set Up
Objectives

As stated above, each Mission will provide Objectives which must be completed in order to win the Mission. Always take careful note of what you have to do. You lose immediately if your U-Boat is destroyed. You do not lose just because all six of the key crew members referred to on each Mission Map are Killed in Action — there is, of course, a full crew on the U-Boat who can complete the Mission without those key crew members (although the job will be more difficult!). For clarity, you only need to do exactly what the objectives say in order to succeed in a particular Mission. There may be other distractions on the map, such other enemy Ships or Aircraft, but these only need to be destroyed if the objectives specifically say so. For example, here are the Objectives for Mission 1:

Objective: Destroy the Merchant Ship before it exits the map, then exit the map in the direction of the red arrow.

The Objectives here require you to destroy the Merchant Ship and then to exit the Mission Map at a particular point. There is no need to destroy any other enemy units, although of course it might help your cause if you do!

The Units

The only unit in the game that is controlled by you is the German U-Boat. It will encounter various Allied units which are controlled by the game system itself. These units consist of Merchant Ships, Corvettes and Destroyers (Ships) and B24 Liberators (Aircraft).

Facing, Line of Sight and Range

The Facing of any Unit in this game (U-Boat, Ship or Aircraft) is simply the direction the main hull or fuselage faces out of a hex, and this can therefore be any one of six directions. Units are always placed so that they are Facing the edge of a hex (rather than a corner). Facing is important when it comes to deciding Movement options, Turning direction, and also some aspects of battle.

Line of Sight runs in all directions and at all angles from a Unit’s hex with no distance limitation. Line of Sight is established by tracing an imaginary line from the centre of one unit’s hex to the centre of another unit’s hex and checking the hexes that the line passes through. Attacks by Ship gunfire or U-Boat deck gun fire and other mechanisms which use this Line of Sight method are each restricted to 3 hexes in Range and so it is not difficult to establish Line of Sight. Since only Land hexes block Line of Sight in this game, Line of Sight will often not be an issue, as many Mission Maps include significant areas of open water. For clarity, units never block Line of Sight.

Line of Sight is never an issue when considering units on the same hex or units which are adjacent to each other — units always have Line of Sight to another unit on the same hex as itself or on an adjacent hex.

When units trace Line of Sight to an enemy unit which is two hexes away, Line of Sight is just a little more complex but still follows the basic rule with the imaginary line referred to above being drawn (centre of hex to centre of hex). Before you reach for the ruler or laser, please be assured that these are not required! The two hexes in this situation will either be in a direct line of hexes with each other and Line of Sight will travel through just the one hex between them, or they will be separated by two hexes and Line of Sight will travel directly up the edge between those two hexes (in this latter case, always take the hex which is most favourable to the ‘observer’ unit). Here’s an example: