Depth

Your U-Boat has the ability to Dive deeper into the Sea and to Ascend back up. In this game there are 4 possible Depths:

➤ Surfaced — The U-Boat is afloat on the Sea and therefore potentially very visible to enemies.
➤ Periscope Depth — The U-Boat is just below the surface with only the periscope visible (if at all).
➤ Medium Depth — The U-Boat is 50–100 yards or so under the surface.
➤ Deep — The U-Boat is 100–200 yards or so under the surface.

The gameplay effects of Depth will be covered as the Rules are explained below. However, as a general guide, your U-Boat is harder to detect at deeper levels, but it is easier to manoeuvre at shallower depths. Torpedoes can only be Fired and Loaded at shallower depths and Repairs are easier when Surfaced. The Deck Gun and Anti-Aircraft Flak Gun can only be Fired when Surfaced.

Detection Level

The Detection Level (DL) determines how much the enemy knows about the current position of the U-Boat. There are 4 Detection Levels: 0–3 (it can never go above Level 3):

➤ 0 — Silent
The enemy is not even sure that your U-Boat is in the vicinity.

➤ 1 — Aware
The enemy is aware of the presence of your U-Boat but not its location.

➤ 2 — Traced
The enemy knows more or less where your U-Boat is.

➤ 3 — Locked
The enemy knows exactly where your U-Boat is.

As with Depth, the gameplay effects of the Detection Level will be explained at relevant points in the Rules below. For now, note that as the Detection Level increases, the enemy units will start to hunt you down more and become more aggressive. The difference between DL1 and DL2 is particularly significant.

Set Up

Set up for each Mission is generally very quick:

➤ First, place Allied Ships on those hexes with relevant initial letters on them (M for Merchant Ship, C for Corvette and D for Destroyer). Place them Facing the edge of the hex where the initial letter is printed.

➤ Then place your U-Boat on the ‘U’ hex, Facing any direction of your choosing and at any depth.

➤ Place a counter or marker at zero on the Detection Level track in the top left hand corner of the Mission Map.

➤ Place a counter or marker in each of the 5 Torpedo Tubes to indicate that they are each loaded.

➤ No other counters or markers need to be placed at this stage. You have a full crew and no damage.

➤ Always check the specific instructions at the top of the page adjacent to each Mission Map to ensure nothing alters these basic instructions for any particular Mission.