Example of a U-Boat Phase

I roll 3d6 and roll 2, 4, 5. I take the highest (5) and add 1 because my Captain has not been Killed in Action, giving me 6 Action Points. I decide that now is a good time to attack, so I Move my U-Boat one hex forward, which costs me 1 AP because my U-Boat is Surfaced. I then Turn my U-Boat to the left so that my front Torpedo Tubes are Facing the direction I want to attack — this costs another 1 AP, leaving me with 4 AP.

I then Fire Torpedoes at a cost of 2 AP, leaving me with 2 AP left to spend. I decide to launch 3 Torpedoes because I have two enemy Ships in my line of fire (which, for Torpedoes, only runs along the line of hexes to my front (or rear). I move the Detection Track up 1 level as a result of the launch (because I’m launching 3). The Torpedoes will get to the Corvette first. Checking the Chart, I see that at a Range of 2 hexes I need 4+ to Hit the Front (or Rear) of the Corvette. You can see clearly on the Mission Map above that the Facing of the Corvette is directly towards my U-Boat, and therefore I am hitting its front. I roll 3d6 (one for each Torpedo) and roll 1, 3, 6. That’s 2 misses and 1 Hit. For the Hit, I roll 1d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart and roll a 3, leaving the Corvette Damaged. The Hit causes the Detection Level to increase by another 1 level.

The 2 missed Torpedoes continue along the row of hexes and reach the Merchant Ship. The Range is now 4 hexes and the Torpedoes are coming up against the side of the Ship. The Chart tells me that again I need to roll 4+ to Hit. I roll 2d6 and roll 4, 5. Both Hit and so I roll 2d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart, rolling 5, 5. A single 5 was enough to Sink the Merchant Ship, which is removed from the Map. Note that the Detection Level is not increased for these Hits, as it has already been increased for the earlier Hit on the Corvette. The Detection Level can only ever be increased by a maximum of 2 levels for any one attack: 1 for launching 3 Torpedoes, and 1 if any of them Hit. If 1 or 2 Torpedoes are launched then that attack can only raise the Level by 1 maximum (if any Hit).

Because the Corvette is still alive, albeit Damaged, I decide to use my final 2 APs to Change Depth by Diving to Periscope Depth (although maybe I would be better off attacking again with Torpedoes (if I have any loaded) or my Deck Gun (if it is not damaged)).