Phase 2 — Merchant Ships Phase

This relatively quick Phase is where any Merchant Ships on the Map get to Move. It is summarised like this on the page adjacent to each Mission Map:

Merchant Ships Phase:
If Undamaged MOVE 1 Hex
If Damaged, roll d6: on 4+ MOVE 1 Hex
Always Face dotted line

As you can see, Merchant Ships Move one hex if they are undamaged. They Move along the dotted line which emanates from their starting hex and should always be placed Facing the next hex to which they will Move as indicated by the dotted line. If a Ship is Damaged, then roll a d6 and only Move it if the die roll is 4, 5 or 6. If a Ship Moves off the Map (at the yellow arrow) then remove it from the Map. If this happens you lose the game if the Objectives required you to destroy it.

As can be seen in this diagram, the Merchant Ship Moves one hex along its track (dotted line). When it enters the new hex, it immediately Turns to Face down the map because that is where the dotted line takes it next.

Reminder: Merchant Ships will not Move if the hex they are Moving to already has a Ship in it. They can Move into the same hex as the U-Boat, which will be forced to Dive if it is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth — this will be explained below when looking at Corvette and Destroyer actions.

Phase 3 — Detection Phase

In this Phase enemy Corvettes and Destroyers (not Merchant Ships) will use their search equipment (including sonar) to try to find you. This Chart summarises the key points here:

Detection Phase:
Roll a d6 for each Escort which has the U-Boat in LOS and within 3 hexes.
Each success = +1 DL

Base Detection Roll needed (if U-Boat is):
Surfaced: 1+
Periscope: 2+
Medium: 4+
Deep: 5+

Modify as follows:
Engine Damage: Decrease roll required by 1
Sonar Operator is alive: Increase roll required by 1

As stated in the Chart, the effective Range of their equipment is 3 hexes and they do need Line of Sight (in any direction — explained earlier). For each Ship that can detect, roll 1d6 and consult the Chart for the roll needed to succeed. As you can see, the base number required depends on the current depth level of the U-Boat:

Surfaced: 1+ | Periscope: 2+ | Medium: 4+ | Deep: 5+

There are just 2 modifiers to apply. If your Sonar Operator is still alive, the target roll is increased (for example, the roll for Medium Depth would become 5+). If the U-Boat’s Engine is damaged (making it noisy) then the target number is reduced by 1 (for example, the roll for Periscope Depth would become 1+, which is an automatic success of course).

For each die which rolls the target number or higher, the Detection Level is increased by 1.

Note: You can skip this Phase if the Detection Level is already at 3, as it cannot go any higher.