1. Determine the number of dice that will be rolled for the Escort. As you can see from the Chart, Destroyers roll a basic 3 dice and Corvettes roll a basic 2 dice. In both cases, if the Ship in question is not Damaged, add a number of dice equal to the current Detection Level.

2. Roll the dice and arrange them in order from lowest to highest. Then resolve each and every die (including duplicates) in turn, lowest to highest, performing the actions set out in the chart for that numbered die. Always try to perform every Action for each die even if an earlier Action is not possible.

For example, if an Escort rolls 1, 3, 5, 5 then it will first use the 1. If the Detection Level is greater than 0 then it will try to FIRE at the U-Boat or deploy DEPTH CHARGES (as we’ll see below, it can only do one of these things depending on the Depth of the U-Boat).

Using the 3 it will MOVE and then (whether it moved or not) it will TURN, and whatever the outcome of this, if the Detection Level is greater than 0 it will then seek to deploy DEPTH CHARGES.

With the 5 if the Detection Level is greater than 0 it will seek to FIRE at the U-Boat using its main guns.

It will then do the same again with the other 5.

Escort Actions

The actions available to the Escorts are as follows:

MOVE

For each Move Action, the Escort will Move one hex forward to the one adjacent hex it is currently Facing, if possible. It cannot enter a hex which:

➤ Is a Land hex.
➤ Already has a Ship in it.

If it cannot Move into that hex (including where the destination hex would be ‘off map’) then it will not Move.

Forcing the U-Boat to Dive

If the Escort Moves into the same hex as the U-Boat, then it is necessary to consider the U-Boat’s current Depth.

➤ If the U-Boat is at Medium Depth or Deep then there is no additional effect.
➤ If the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth then it will make a Forced Dive.

Immediately set the U-Boat’s Depth to Medium and increase the Detection Level by 1. In addition, at the start of the next turn, the U-Boat suffers a –2 AP penalty when establishing the available APs for that turn. Of course, it could be the case that the U-Boat is in Shallow Sea, in which case it cannot go deeper than Periscope Level. If a ‘Forced Dive’ situation arises in that case, then the U-Boat is deemed to be Destroyed and the game ends in defeat. The box at the bottom of the page adjacent to each Mission Map has reminders of all this:

Ship Movement and Forced Dive:
Ships cannot enter a hex with another Ship.
‘Blocked’ = Land, off-Map or another Ship.
If a Ship enters a hex with Surfaced or Periscope Depth U-Boat, it is Forced to Dive to Medium: DL +1 now, and –2 AP next turn.
Hull Damage: U-Boat immediately ascends to permitted depth. If it cannot Dive/Ascend as required here, it is Destroyed.

Note also the point about Hull Damage here (in italics). Hull Damage is covered later when we look at Escorts attacking the U-Boat, but note that the U-Boat’s ability to stay at certain Depths is affected by the Damage it takes to its Hull. The Hull Damage Track on the Mission Maps has reminder of this. As you can see, the first Hull Damage taken means it cannot go Deep. The second means it cannot go to Medium Depth and the third means it cannot submerge at all (must stay Surfaced). If it ever suffers Hull Damage and is then left deeper than permitted, it must ascend immediately to the deepest permitted Depth (no Detection Level effect or AP penalty for ascending). If a Ship in the same hex prevents this, then the U-Boat will be Destroyed.