TURN
TURN: If DL=0-1, turn hex edge towards Anchor.  If DL=2-3, turn 1 hex edge towards U-Boat.  If Facing U-Boat/Anchor, only turn if blocked (turn randomly).  If Facing away, turn randomly.  If on same hex as U-Boat/Anchor, only turn if Blocked (turn randomly).

For each Turn Action, the Escort will Turn one hex edge (60 degrees) either to its left or to its right.

When it comes to the direction it will Turn (left or right) this depends on the position of the U-Boat in relation to either the Anchor hex printed on the Mission Map or the U-Boat, which in turn depends on the current Detection Level.

We’ll work through the reminder box above which is found on the page adjacent to each Mission Map.

If the DL is 0 or 1, then the Escort will Turn towards the Anchor hex. If the DL is 2 or 3, then the Escorts have a better idea of your position and will instead Turn towards the U-Boat. ‘Towards’ always means Turn in the direction which currently has the smallest angle to the Anchor hex or U-Boat.

As noted in the box, if the Escort is Facing the Anchor or U-Boat (which means it happens to be on the exact same line of hexes as the Anchor or U-Boat and Facing directly at it), then it will only Turn if it is Blocked. ‘Blocked’ means that the hex it is Facing is not currently one it can Move into because there is a Ship on it or it is a Land hex or ‘off map’. If that is the case, then the direction of Turning is selected completely at random. This is because whichever way it Turns in that case, the angle to the Anchor hex or U-Boat will be the same (zero degrees of course — it is Facing right at it).

Similarly, if the Escort happens to be on the exact same line of hexes as the Anchor or U-Boat and Facing directly away from it, it will Turn randomly, this time regardless of whether it is Facing a Blocked hex or not.

Finally, if the Escort happens to be in the same hex as the U-Boat (directly above it) then it will Turn randomly, but only if Blocked (the hex it is Facing has a Ship in it, or is a Land hex or ‘off map’).

Examples of Turning

All cases assume that DL = 2 or 3 (but the examples would work the same if DL = 0–1 and the U-Boat was actually the Anchor hex).

• The undamaged Corvette would Turn one hex edge to its left as that is towards the U-Boat. It does not matter that it Turns past the actual direction of the U-Boat. It would still do this even if it resulted in the Corvette now Facing a Blocked hex (which it doesn’t here).

• The undamaged Destroyer will not Turn because it is Facing directly at the U-Boat and the hex it is Facing is not Blocked.

• The damaged Corvette will Turn randomly because it is Facing directly at the U-Boat and the hex it is Facing is Blocked. Again, it will Turn in the randomly chosen direction even if that meant it was then Facing a Blocked hex.

• The damaged Destroyer will Turn randomly because it is Facing directly away from the U-Boat (regardless of whether the hex it is Facing is Blocked or not).

Reminder: It never matters if the hex that the Escort Turns to Face is itself Blocked (Ship, Land or ‘off map’).