Phase 5 — Allied B24 Phase

Allied B24 Aircraft are placed as part of the End of Turn Events Phase (Phase 6) below.

In this Phase, any B24 Aircraft already on the Map will activate (in any order you choose). As you can see from the box above, the first thing that a B24 will do when activated is to Move two hexes in the direction it is currently Facing. B24s can enter any hex type, including Land hexes and hexes already occupied by a Ship and/or the U-Boat. If its Moves take it off the Mission Map then remove it, ready to be placed again if the relevant Event is rolled in Phase 6 below.

Once it has Moved, then it may Turn. It will only do this if the Detection Level is 2 or 3, in which case it will always Turn towards the U-Boat in the same way that Escorts do (as explained earlier). However, note that if the Detection Level is 0 or 1, the B24 simply will not Turn at all (the Anchor is irrelevant to B24s). The other instructions are slightly different too. If it is directly Facing the U-Boat (on the same line of hexes) then it will never Turn (why would it, as nothing Blocks it?). If Facing directly away, it will Turn randomly. If it is in the same hex as the U-Boat it will only Turn if the hex it is Facing is ‘off Map’, in which case it will again Turn randomly. Remember, it will only ever Turn if the Detection Level is 2 or 3, not if it is 0 or 1. At 0 or 1 it will fly straight until it leaves the Mission Map.

Once it has Moved 2 hexes and then Turned (or not), it will seek to Attack the U-Boat with bombs and machine guns. However, it can only do this if the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth and only at Range 0–1 in any direction (it must therefore be adjacent to or in the same hex as the U-Boat).

Before it does Attack, the U-Boat gets a chance to use its Flak Gun to shoot it down (or scare it away). However, as stated above, it can only do this if it is Surfaced (obviously) and the Flak Gun is undamaged. If so, roll 2d6 and on 8+ (7+ if the U-Boat’s Lookout is alive) then the B24 is destroyed (or scared off).

If the B24 survives that attempt, or the U-Boat could not use the Flak Gun for any reason, then roll 1d6 on the Damage Chart that is included within the B24 box itself. The outcomes are self-explanatory.

Phase 6 — End of Turn Events Phase

This Phase is where varied, random and unexpected events can occur which mostly add to the challenge of the various Missions but can be helpful on occasion. The relevant chart will, as usual, appear on the page opposite each Mission Map. As it changes from Mission to Mission, it is not reproduced here, but examples will be given below as each Event is explained.

In this Phase, two dice are rolled and added together. The relevant numbered Event is then performed if possible. If impossible or irrelevant, then no Event occurs; the dice are not rerolled. Each possible Event will now be explained in full: