Place a B24 Liberator Aircraft

If DL = 2–3 place B24 Facing U-Boat, on edge hex of Map which is furthest from and on same hex-line as U-Boat (max 2)

This only applies if the Detection Level is 2 or 3. If so, then a new B24 aircraft is placed on the Mission Map. However, note that (as stated in the Event itself) a maximum of 2 aircraft can be present on the Mission Map at any one time. If there are already 2 on the Map, then ignore this Event.

To work out where to place the B24, trace the 6 lines of hexes that run out of the U-Boat’s current hex until you reach the edge of the Map. Of the six lines, take the longest (decide randomly if there is a tie). Then place the B24 on the hex at the edge of the Map at the end of the longest line. Always place it Facing the U-Boat. It will first Activate in Phase 5 of the next turn.

In this example, the longest of the six lines of hexes emanating from the U-Boat’s own hex is the line running straight up the Map. The B24 is therefore placed at the edge of the Map on this line of hexes Facing directly at the U-Boat.

Escort Detection

Escort Detection: If DL is not already at 3, perform Phase 3 (only) now

Simply repeat Phase 3 (the Detection Phase) again now. There is no point in (ever) performing this Phase when the Detection Level is already at 3, as that is the highest it can go.

U-Boat Radio Interception by Allies

If U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope depth, Radio intercepted by Allies: If DL = 0 then set DL to 1

Note that this Event only applies when the Detection Level is currently 0. If so, and the U-Boat is Surfaced or at Periscope Depth, then the DL Level is raised to 1. The Event has no other effect.

U-Boat Runs Silently

If U-Boat not Surfaced and Engine is not damaged, U-Boat runs silently for a while: −1 DL

If the U-Boat is at any other depth than ‘Surfaced’ and its Engine is not damaged (in which case it would be noisy) then you can reduce the Detection Level by 1.

Damage from High Pressure

Hull Pressure: If Deep, Hull groans under the pressure: +1 Hull Damage (U-Boat must ascend to Medium Depth)

If the U-Boat is Deep then it suffers 1 Hull Damage. Of course, this will immediately result in it having to ascend to Medium Depth.

Once the End of Turn Events Phase has been completed, return to Phase 1 and start the next turn.