aspects of your U-Boat that can be damaged are the Flak Gun, the Deck Gun, the Engine, the 5 Torpedo Tubes (individually) and the main Hull of the U-Boat.

The Hull cannot be Repaired at all, so we’ll not mention that again here.

The Flak Gun and Deck Gun can be Repaired but only when the U-Boat is Surfaced (irrespective of whether the Engineer is alive or not). Again, this is pretty obvious — those guns are positioned outside the U-Boat on top of the main body!

The Engine can be Repaired at any Depth if the Engineer is alive, then only on the Surface as usual.

Similarly, the 5 Torpedo Tubes can each be Repaired at any Depth, but only on the Surface once the Engineer is Killed in Action. Note also that the Chart says each action allows 2 Tubes to be Repaired. You choose which 2 to Repair. Once Repaired, they will always be empty and therefore need to be Loaded before use (because they are deemed to be emptied when initially damaged — explained later when looking at enemy ship attacks).

FIRE DECK GUN

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
— | — | — | —

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

FIRE DECK GUN — At Ships in LOS (R1–3) Roll 2d6: 7+ to Hit at R1–2 • 8+ to Hit at R3 — On Hit, set DL to 3

This action allows the U-Boat to Fire its Deck Gun at a cost of 2 APs. It cannot be Fired if it is damaged of course, and can only be Fired if the U-Boat is Surfaced (the Gun is outside and on top of the main body of the U-Boat). You should select a target enemy Ship and then ensure that the target is within 3 hexes of the U-Boat (not in the same hex as it) and that the U-Boat has Line of Sight to the target (as explained earlier in the Rules). Remember, only Land hexes block Line of Sight. The Facing of the U-Boat and the target is irrelevant here. If Range and Line of Sight are valid, then roll 2d6 to take the shot. At Range 1–2 hexes, a total 7+ is required to Hit. At Range 3 hexes, it’s 8+. If successful, then the Detection Level is immediately set to 3. This (and the fact the U-Boat needs to be Surfaced) makes it a risky option, which is best saved for finishing off Ships when perhaps Torpedoes may not be an option. For each Gun Hit, you get to roll 1d6 on the Allied Ship Damage Chart which looks like this:

Allied Ship Damage Chart

For each Torpedo / Deck Gun Hit on a Ship, roll d6 for Damage:

Target Type	Roll 1	Roll 2–3	Roll 4–5	Roll 6
Merchant	No significant damage	Damaged → Sunk	Catastrophic Hit → Sunk	—
Corvette	1–2 No significant damage	3–4 Damaged → Sunk	5–6 Catastrophic Hit → Sunk	—
Destroyer	1–3 No significant damage	4–5 Damaged → Sunk	6 Catastrophic Hit → Sunk	—

The Chart is pretty self-explanatory.

• No significant damage results have no effect.

• The Damaged → Sunk result means the target Ship is Damaged if it is not already — mark it as Damaged in some way. If it is already Damaged then it will be Sunk and removed from the Map.

• The Catastrophic Hit → Sunk result means the target Ship being Sunk immediately.

LOAD TORPEDOES

Surf | Peri | Med | Deep
1 | 4 | — | —

Roll 3 dice (2 dice if Engine is Damaged); AP this turn = highest die rolled + 1 AP if Captain is alive

LOAD TORPS — Load 2 tubes; +1 if Weapons Officer is KIA

This action allows your U-Boat to Load up its Torpedo Tubes, but only if it is Surfaced (1 AP) or at Periscope Depth (4 APs). Note that you can Load any 2 Torpedo Tubes of your choice out of the 5 available.